An easy is a piece of writing, usually from an author's personal point of view. Easys are non-fiction but often subjective; while expository, they can also include narrative. Easys can be literary criticism, political manifestos, learned arguments, observations of daily life, recollections, and reflections of the author.

The definition of an easy is vague, overlapping with those of an article and a short story. Almost all modern easys are written in prose, but works in verse have been dubbed easys (e.g. Alexander Pope's An Easy on Criticism and An Easy on Man). While brevity usually defines an easy, voluminous works like John Locke's An Easy Concerning Human Understanding and Thomas Malthus's An Easy on the Principle of Population provide counterexamples.

The word easy derives from the French infinitive easyer, 'to try' or 'to attempt'. The first author to describe his works as easys was the Frenchman Michel de Montaigne (1533-1592). Inspired in particular by the works of Plutarch, a translation of whose Oeuvres morales (Moral works) into French had just been published by Jacques Amyot, Montaigne began to compose his easys in 1572; the first edition, entitled Essais, was published in two volumes in 1580. For the rest of his life he continued revising previously published easys and composing new ones.

Francis Bacon's easys, published in book form in 1597, 1612, and 1625, were the first works in English that described themselves as easys. Ben Jonson first used the word easyist in English in 1609, according to the Oxford English Dictionary.

Notable easyists are legion. They include G.K. Chesterton, Virginia Woolf, Voltaire, Adrienne Rich, Alamgir Hashmi, Joan Didion, Jean Baudrillard, Benjamin Disraeli, Susan Sontag, Natalia Ginzburg, Sara Suleri, Annie Dillard, Joseph Addison, Richard Steele, Charles Lamb, Leo Tolstoy, William Hazlitt, Thomas Babington Macaulay, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry David Thoreau, Percy Bysshe Shelley, Mary Shelley, Walter Bagehot, Maurice Maeterlinck, George Orwell, George Bernard Shaw, John D'Agata, Reynolds Price, Gore Vidal, Marguerite Yourcenar, J.M. Coetzee, Gaston Waringhien and E.B. White.

It is very difficult to define the genre into which easys fall. The following remarks by Aldous Huxley, a leading easyist, may help:

"Like the novel, the easy is a literary device for saying almost everything about almost anything. By tradition, almost by definition, the easy is a short piece, and it is therefore impossible to give all things full play within the limits of a single easy. But a collection of easys can cover almost as much ground, and cover it almost as thoroughly, as can a long novel. Montaigne's Third Book is the equivalent, very nearly, of a good slice of the Comédie Humaine. Easys belong to a literary species whose extreme variability can be studied most effectively within a three-poled frame of reference. There is the pole of the personal and the autobiographical; there is the pole of the objective, the factual, the concrete-particular; and there is the pole of the abstract-universal. Most easyists are at home and at their best in the neighborhood of only one of the easy's three poles, or at the most only in the neighborhood of two of them. There are the predominantly personal easyists, who write fragments of reflective autobiography and who look at the world through the keyhole of anecdote and description. There are the predominantly objective easyists who do not speak directly of themselves, but turn their attention outward to some literary or scientific or political theme. … And how splendid, how truly oracular are the utterances of the great generalizers! … The most richly satisfying easys are those which make the best not of one, not of two, but of all the three worlds in which it is possible for the easy to exist" (Collected Easys, "Preface"). 
